=pod

=head1 MAKEFILES FOR XILINX FPGA/CPLD PROJECTS

These makefiles were created so that you can develop a Xilinx project using
the WebPACK/ISE GUI, but then use a makefile to automate the build process 
once the development work is done.

Several makefiles will be described:

=over

=item L<Xilinx Rules Makefile>

This makefile contains the rules that move the HDL files through the
synthesizer, place & route and bitstream generation processes to produce the
final bitstream file.

=item L<Project Makefile>

This makefile resides in the WebPACK/ISE project directory and uses the
Xilinx rules makefile to create the bitstream for the project.

=item L<Directory Makefile>

This makefile creates bitstreams for a number WebPACK/ISE projects by calling
the project makefile in each of the project subdirectories.

=back

=head2 Xilinx Rules Makefile

The F<xilinx_rules.mk> file contains the variable definitions and rules that perform 
the bulk of the operations for creating an FPGA or CPLD configuration bitstream.
The rules encode the process flow for an FPGA:

  (.vhd,.ver)-->[XST]-->(.ngc,.ucf)-->[NGDBUILD]-->(.ngd,.pcf)-->[MAP]-->(.ncd,.pcf)--> ...
            ... -->[PAR]-->(.ncd)-->[BITGEN]-->(.bit)

and the process flow for a CPLD:

  (.vhd,.ver)-->[XST]-->(.ngc,.ucf)-->[NGDBUILD]-->(.ngd)-->[CPLDFIT]-->(.vm6)--> ...
            ... -->[HPREP6]-->(.jed)-->[IMPACT]-->(.svf)

F<xilinx_rules.mk> is not used directly.  It is included in the main F<makefile> of a
WebPACK/ISE project.  F<xilinx_rules.mk> is usually placed in the
F</usr/local/include> directory so that C<make> can find it when needed.

The F<L<xilinx_rules.mk|"xilinx_rules.mk">> file is shown below.
F<xilinx_rules.mk> uses several Perl script files 
(F<L<get_option_values.pl|get_option_values.pl Perl Script>>,
F<L<set_option_values.pl|set_option_values.pl Perl Script>>, and
F<L<get_project_files.pl|get_project_files.pl Perl Script>>)
and these are also shown.

=head3 xilinx_rules.mk

	#-------------------------------------------------------------------
	# Company       : XESS Corp.
	# Engineer      : Dave Vanden Bout
	# Creation Date : 05/16/2006
	# Copyright     : 2005-2006, XESS Corp
	# Tool Versions : make 3.79.1, perl 5.8.8, WebPACK 8.1.03i
	#
	# Description:
	#    This makefile contains the rules that move the HDL files through
	#    the Xilinx WebPACK/ISE synthesizer, place & route and bitstream 
	#    generation processes to produce the final bitstream file.
	#
	# Revision:
	#    1.0.3
	#
	# Additional Comments:
	#    This file is normally included in another makefile using the
	#    `include' directive.  Usually this file is placed in the 
	#    /usr/local/include directory so make can find it automatically.
	#
	#    The makefile targets are:
	#        config: Creates bit/svf file for FPGA/CPLD.
	#        svf:    Directly creates bit file for FPGA.
	#        bit:    Directly creates svf file for CPLD.
	#        mcs:    Creates Intel MCS file from bit file.
	#        exo:    Creates Motorola EXO file from bit file.
	#        timing: Creates timing report for FPGA (not CPLD).
	#        clean:  Cleans temporary files created during build process.
	#        distclean: Clean and also remove timing report.
	#        maintainer-clean: Distclean and also remove bit/svf files.
	#        nice:   beautify the HDL source code
	#
	#    1.0.3:
	#        Modified to support ISE9 project directory structure.
	#    1.0.2:
	#        Added more file types for removal during cleaning.
	#    1.0.1:
	#        Added 'nice' target.
	#    1.0.0
	#        Initial revision.
	#-------------------------------------------------------------------



	#
	# Paths to utilities.
	#

	# Standard OS utilities.  These are for DOS.  Set them for your particular OS.
	RM                 := erase /s /q
	RMDIR              := rmdir /s /q
	MKDIR              := mkdir
	ECHO               := echo
	EMACS              := /bin/emacs-21.3/bin/emacs

	# These are Perl script files that perform some simple operations.
	UTILITY_DIR        := C:/BIN/
	SET_OPTION_VALUES  := perl $(UTILITY_DIR)set_option_values.pl
	GET_OPTION_VALUES  := perl $(UTILITY_DIR)get_option_values.pl
	GET_PROJECT_FILES  := perl $(UTILITY_DIR)get_project_files.pl



	#
	# Flags and option values that control the behavior of the Xilinx tools.
	# You can override these values in the makefile that includes this one.
	# Otherwise, the default values will be set as shown below.
	#

	# Unless otherwise specified, the name of the design and the top-level
	# entity are derived from the name of the directory that contains the design.
	DIR_SPACES  := $(subst /, ,$(CURDIR))
	DIR_NAME    := $(word $(words $(DIR_SPACES)), $(DIR_SPACES))
	DESIGN_NAME ?= $(DIR_NAME)
	TOP_NAME    ?= $(DESIGN_NAME)

	# Extract the part identifier from the project .npl file.
	PART_TYPE        ?=            $(shell $(GET_OPTION_VALUES) $(DESIGN_NAME).npl DEVICE)
	PART_SPEED_GRADE ?= $(subst -,,$(shell $(GET_OPTION_VALUES) $(DESIGN_NAME).npl DEVSPEED))
	PART_PACKAGE     ?=            $(shell $(GET_OPTION_VALUES) $(DESIGN_NAME).npl DEVPKG)
	PART             ?= $(PART_TYPE)-$(PART_SPEED_GRADE)-$(PART_PACKAGE)

	# This variable will be non-empty if the design is targeted to an XC9500 CPLD.
	IS_CPLD = $(findstring xc95,$(PART))

	# Flags common to both FPGA and CPLD design flow.
	INTSTYLE         ?= -intstyle silent      # call Xilinx tools in silent mode
	XST_FLAGS        ?= $(INTSTYLE)           # most synthesis flags are specified in the .xst file
	UCF_FILE         ?= $(DESIGN_NAME).ucf    # constraint/pin-assignment file
	NGDBUILD_FLAGS   ?= $(INTSTYLE) -dd _ngo  # ngdbuild flags
	NGDBUILD_FLAGS += $(if $(UCF_FILE),-uc,) $(UCF_FILE)         # append the UCF file option if it is specified 

	# Flags for FPGA-specific tools.  These were extracted by looking in the
	# .cmd_log file after compiling the design with the WebPACK/ISE GUI.
	MAP_FLAGS        ?= $(INTSTYLE) -cm area -pr b -k 4 -c 100 -tx off
	PAR_FLAGS        ?= $(INTSTYLE) -w -ol std -t 1
	TRCE_FLAGS       ?= $(INTSTYLE) -e 3 -l 3
	BITGEN_FLAGS     ?= $(INTSTYLE)           # most bitgen flags are specified in the .ut file
	PROMGEN_FLAGS    ?= -u 0                  # flags that control the MCS/EXO file generation

	# Flags for CPLD-specific tools.  These were extracted by looking in the
	# .cmd_log file after compiling the design with the WebPACK/ISE GUI.
	CPLDFIT_FLAGS    ?= -ofmt vhdl -optimize speed -htmlrpt -loc on -slew fast -init low -inputs 54 -pterms 25 -unused float -power std -terminate keeper
	SIGNATURE        ?= $(DESIGN_NAME)        # JTAG-accessible signature stored in the CPLD
	HPREP6_FLAGS     ?= -s IEEE1149           # hprep flags
	HPREP6_FLAGS     += $(if $(SIGNATURE),-n,) $(SIGNATURE)  # append signature if it is specified 

	# Determine the version of Xilinx ISE that is being used by reading it from the
	# readme.txt file in the top-level directory of the Xilinx software.
	ISE_VERSION ?= $(shell grep -m 1 -o -P "ISE\s*[0-9]+" %XILINX%/readme.txt | grep -m 1 -P -o "[0-9]+")
	ifeq ($(ISE_VERSION),6)
		PROJNAV_DIR ?= __projnav
	else
	ifeq ($(ISE_VERSION),7)
		PROJNAV_DIR ?= __projnav
	else
		PROJNAV_DIR ?= .
	endif
	endif

	# Select the correct tool options files that control the synthesizer
	# and bitstream generator for FPGAs or CPLDs.
	ifneq (,$(IS_CPLD))
		XST_CPLD_OPTIONS_FILE ?= $(PROJNAV_DIR)/$(DESIGN_NAME).xst
		IMPACT_OPTIONS_FILE   ?= _impact.cmd
		XST_OPTIONS_FILE       = $(XST_CPLD_OPTIONS_FILE)
	else
		XST_FPGA_OPTIONS_FILE ?= $(PROJNAV_DIR)/$(DESIGN_NAME).xst
		BITGEN_OPTIONS_FILE   ?= $(DESIGN_NAME).ut
		XST_OPTIONS_FILE       = $(XST_FPGA_OPTIONS_FILE)
	endif



	#
	# The following rules describe how to compile the design to an FPGA/CPLD.
	#

	# Get the list of VHDL and Verilog files that this design depends on by
	# extracting their names from the project .prj file.  This variable is used
	# by make for checking dependencies, but the synthesizer tool ignores this
	# variable and uses the file list found in the .prj file.
	ifeq ($(origin HDL_FILES),undefined)
	  HDL_FILES       ?= $(shell $(GET_PROJECT_FILES) $(DESIGN_NAME).prj)
	endif

	# cleanup the source code to make it look nice
	%.nice: %.vhd
		$(EMACS) -batch $< -f vhdl-beautify-buffer -f save-buffer
		$(RM) $<~

	# Synthesize the HDL files into an NGC file.  This rule is triggered if
	# any of the HDL files are changed or the synthesis options are changed.
	%.ngc: $(HDL_FILES) $(XST_OPTIONS_FILE)
		-$(MKDIR) $(PROJNAV_DIR)
	                # The .xst file containing the synthesis options is modified to 
	                # reflect the design name, device, and top-level entity and stored
	                # in a temporary .xst file.
		$(SET_OPTION_VALUES) $(XST_OPTIONS_FILE) \
			"set -tmpdir $(PROJNAV_DIR)" \
			"-lso $(DESIGN_NAME).lso" \
			"-ifn $(DESIGN_NAME).prj" \
			"-ofn $(DESIGN_NAME)" \
			"-p $(PART)" \
			"-top $(TOP_NAME)" \
				> $(PROJNAV_DIR)/tmp.xst
		xst $(XST_FLAGS) -ifn $(PROJNAV_DIR)/tmp.xst -ofn $*.syr

	# Take the output of the synthesizer and create the NGD file.  This rule
	# will also be triggered if constraints file is changed.
	%.ngd: %.ngc %.ucf
		ngdbuild $(NGDBUILD_FLAGS) -p $(PART) $*.ngc $*.ngd

	# Map the NGD file and physical-constraints to the FPGA to create the mapped NCD file.
	%_map.ncd %.pcf: %.ngd
		map $(MAP_FLAGS) -p $(PART) -o $*_map.ncd $*.ngd $*.pcf

	# Place & route the mapped NCD file to create the final NCD file.
	%.ncd: %_map.ncd %.pcf
		par $(PAR_FLAGS) $*_map.ncd $*.ncd $*.pcf

	# Take the final NCD file and create an FPGA bitstream file.  This rule will also be
	# triggered if the bit generation options file is changed.
	%.bit: %.ncd $(BITGEN_OPTIONS_FILE)
		bitgen $(BITGEN_FLAGS) -f $(BITGEN_OPTIONS_FILE) $*.ncd

	# Convert a bitstream file into an MCS hex file that can be stored into Flash memory.
	%.mcs: %.bit
		promgen $(PROMGEN_FLAGS) $*.bit -p mcs

	# Convert a bitstream file into an EXO hex file that can be stored into Flash memory.
	%.exo: %.bit
		promgen $(PROMGEN_FLAGS) $*.bit -p exo

	# Fit the NGD file synthesized for the CPLD to create the VM6 file.
	%.vm6: %.ngd
		cpldfit $(CPLDFIT_FLAGS) -p $(PART) $*.ngd

	# Convert the VM6 file into a JED file for the CPLD.
	%.jed: %.vm6
		hprep6 $(HPREP6_FLAGS) -i $*.vm6

	# Convert JED file into an SVF file for the CPLD.
	%.svf: %.jed $(IMPACT_OPTIONS_FILE)
		$(SET_OPTION_VALUES) $(IMPACT_OPTIONS_FILE) \
			"setCable -port svf -file \"$*.svf\"" \
			"addDevice -position 1 -file \"$*.jed\"" \
				> impactcmd.txt
		$(ECHO) "quit" >> impactcmd.txt
		impact -batch impactcmd.txt

	# Use .config suffix to trigger creation of a bit/svf file
	# depending upon whether an FPGA/CPLD is the target device.
	%.config: $(if $(IS_CPLD),%.svf,%.bit) ;

	# Create the FPGA timing report after place & route.
	%.twr: %.ncd %.pcf
		trce $(TRCE_FLAGS) $*.ncd -o $*.twr $*.pcf

	# Use .timing suffix to trigger timing report creation.
	%.timing: %.twr ;

	# Preserve intermediate files.
	.PRECIOUS: %.ngc %.ngd %_map.ncd %.ncd %.twr %.vm6 %.jed

	# Clean up after creating the configuration file.
	%.clean:
		-$(RM) $*.stx $*.ucf.untf $*.mrp $*.nc1 $*.ngm $*.prm $*.lfp
		-$(RM) $*.placed_ncd_tracker $*.routed_ncd_tracker
		-$(RM) $*.pad_txt $*.twx *.log *.vhd~ $*.dhp $*.jhd $*.cel
		-$(RM) $*.ngr $*.ngc $*.ngd $*.syr $*.bld $*.pcf
		-$(RM) $*_map.mrp $*_map.ncd $*_map.ngm $*.ncd $*.pad
		-$(RM) $*.par $*.xpi $*_pad.csv $*_pad.txt $*.drc $*.bgn
		-$(RM) $*.xml $*_build.xml $*.rpt $*.gyd $*.mfd $*.pnx
		-$(RM) $*.vm6 $*.jed $*.err $*.ER result.txt tmperr.err *.bak *.vhd~
		-$(RM) impactcmd.txt
		-$(RMDIR) xst _ngo $*_html __projnav

	# Clean for distribution.
	%.distclean: %.clean
		-$(RM) $*.twr

	# Clean everything.
	%.maintainer-clean: %.distclean
		-$(RM) $*.bit $*.svf $*.exo $*.mcs



	#
	# Default targets for FPGA/CPLD compilations.
	#

	config          : $(DESIGN_NAME).config
	bit             : $(DESIGN_NAME).bit
	svf             : $(DESIGN_NAME).svf
	mcs             : $(DESIGN_NAME).mcs
	exo             : $(DESIGN_NAME).exo
	timing          : $(DESIGN_NAME).timing
	clean           : $(DESIGN_NAME).clean
	distclean       : $(DESIGN_NAME).distclean
	maintainer-clean: $(DESIGN_NAME).maintainer-clean
	nice            : $(subst .vhd,.nice,$(HDL_FILES))



=head3 get_option_values.pl Perl Script

  #
  # Get selected option value from an options file of a Xilinx WebPACK/ISE project
  #
  $option_file = shift @ARGV;         # first argument is the option file name
  open(FILE,$option_file) || die $!;
  $option_name = $ARGV[0];            # second argument is the option name to search for

  # read lines from option file looking for the given option name
  while(<FILE>) {
    chop;
    /^$option_name\s+/ && print $';   # print out the value for the given option
  }


=head3 set_option_values.pl Perl Script

  #
  # Set option values in an options file of a Xilinx WebPACK/ISE project
  #
  $option_file = shift @ARGV;    # first argument is the option file name
  open(FILE,$option_file) || die $!;
  @options = <FILE>;             # read in all the options
  $options = join("",@options);  # join all options into one big string

  # remaining arguments are new option strings that will replace existing options
  foreach (@ARGV) {
    @option_fields = split(/\s+/,$_);  # split new option string into fields
    $option_value = pop @option_fields; # new option value is last field in the string
    $option_name = join(" ",@option_fields);  # option name is all the preceding fields
    $options =~ s/$option_name\s+.*/$option_name $option_value/gi;  # replace existing value with new value
  }

  print $options;  # print the updated option file


=head3 get_project_files.pl Perl Script

  #
  # Output a list of the files found in the .prj file of a Xilinx WebPACK/ISE project
  #
  open(PRJFILE,$ARGV[0]) || die $!;
  while(<PRJFILE>) {
    @fields = split(/\s+/,$_);
    $f = pop(@fields);  # file name is last field of each line
    $f =~ s/\"//g;  # remove any quotations around file names
    print " " . $f;
  }


=head2 Project Makefile

The contents of the F<makefile> file in the WebPACK/ISE project directory can be as
simple as:

	# include the rules to build the Xilinx configuration bitstream, etc.
	include xilinx_rules.mk

You can also override variables in the F<xilinx_rules.mk> file to change the
behavior of the build process.  For example, to target a different FPGA, you
might use:

	PART = xc2s100-5-tq144

	# include the rules to build the Xilinx configuration bitstream, etc.
	include xilinx_rules.mk

Or if you don't want to use a constraint file, just give it an empty value like so:

	PART = xc2s100-5-tq144
	UCF_FILE =

	# include the rules to build the Xilinx configuration bitstream, etc.
	include xilinx_rules.mk

To build the FPGA or CPLD configuration bitstream, just type the command:

	make

or:

	make config

To generate the timing report for an FPGA design, use the command:

	make timing

To clean any temporary files created during the build process, use the command:

	make clean

You can also remove more of the intermediate files with the command:

	make distclean

And you can remove all of the above plus the configuration bitstream file with:

	make maintainer-clean


=head2 Directory Makefile

If you have a directory that contains several subdirectories, 
each of which contains a WebPACK/ISE project, then the following makefile
will build the bitstream for each project.  This makefile resides in the top-level
directory and it activates the makefiles in each project subdirectory.

	projects := project1 project2 project3

	# These are the standard targets for creating the configuration bitstream and
	# timing report and also for cleaning each project.
	config          : $(projects:=.config)
	timing          : $(projects:=.timing)
	clean           : $(projects:=.clean)
	distclean       : $(projects:=.distclean)
	maintainer-clean: $(projects:=.maintainer-clean)

	# This rule causes make to enter each project directory and activate
	# the makefile found there in order to create the configuration bitstream.
	$(projects:=.config):
		$(MAKE) -C $(subst .config,,$@) $@

	# This rule causes make to enter each FPGA project directory and generate
	# a timing report.
	$(projects:=.timing):
		$(MAKE) -C $(subst .timing,,$@) $@

	# The next three rules cause make to enter each project directory
	# and clean the project to the selected level of cleanliness.

	$(projects:=.clean):
		$(MAKE) -C $(subst .clean,,$@) $@

	$(projects:=.distclean):
		$(MAKE) -C $(subst .distclean,,$@) $@

	$(projects:=.maintainer-clean):
		$(MAKE) -C $(subst .maintainer-clean,,$@) $@

The following makefile is similar to the previous one but it also allows you
to retarget the projects at a different type of FPGA or CPLD and use
new options for the tools.

	# Override the part id for the following projects
	FPGA_PART     := xc3s1000-4-ft256
	fpga_projects := project1 project2

	# Override the part id for the following projects
	CPLD_PART     := xc9572xl-10-vq64
	cpld_projects := project3 project4

	# Override the variables that contain the location of the option files for the
	# synthesizer and bitstream generators so all the projects will be controlled
	# by these master option files in the top-level directory.
	export XST_CPLD_OPTIONS_FILE ?= $(CURDIR)/xst_cpld_options.xst
	export XST_FPGA_OPTIONS_FILE ?= $(CURDIR)/xst_fpga_options.xst
	export BITGEN_OPTIONS_FILE   ?= $(CURDIR)/bitgen_options.ut
	export IMPACT_OPTIONS_FILE   ?= $(CURDIR)/impact_options.txt

	# These are the standard targets for creating the configuration bitstream and
	# timing report and also for cleaning each project.
	config          : $(fpga_projects:=.config)           $(cpld_projects:=.config)
	timing          : $(fpga_projects:=.timing)
	clean           : $(fpga_projects:=.clean)            $(cpld_projects:=.clean)
	distclean       : $(fpga_projects:=.distclean)        $(cpld_projects:=.distclean)
	maintainer-clean: $(fpga_projects:=.maintainer-clean) $(cpld_projects:=.maintainer-clean)

	# This rule causes make to enter each FPGA project directory and activate
	# the makefile found there in order to create the configuration bitstream.
	# Note that the value in the FPGA_PART variable will override the value of the
	# PART variable found in each project directory. 
	$(fpga_projects:=.config):
		$(MAKE) -C $(subst .config,,$@) PART=$(FPGA_PART) $@

	# This rule causes make to enter each CPLD project directory and activate
	# the makefile found there in order to create the configuration bitstream.
	# Note that the value in the CPLD_PART variable will override the value of the
	# PART variable found in each project directory. 
	$(cpld_projects:=.config):
		$(MAKE) -C $(subst .config,,$@) PART=$(CPLD_PART) $@

	# This rule causes make to enter each FPGA project directory and generate
	# a timing report.  CPLD projects do not have a separate phase for creating
	# timing reports.
	$(fpga_projects:=.timing):
		$(MAKE) -C $(subst .timing,,$@) PART=$(FPGA_PART) $@

	# The next three rules cause make to enter each FPGA and CPLD project directory
	# and clean the project to the selected level of cleanliness.

	$(fpga_projects:=.clean) $(cpld_projects:=.clean):
		$(MAKE) -C $(subst .clean,,$@) $@

	$(fpga_projects:=.distclean) $(cpld_projects:=.distclean):
		$(MAKE) -C $(subst .distclean,,$@) $@

	$(fpga_projects:=.maintainer-clean) $(cpld_projects:=.maintainer-clean):
		$(MAKE) -C $(subst .maintainer-clean,,$@) $@


To build the FPGA and CPLD configuration bitstreams for all the projects,
just type the command:

	make

or:

	make config

To generate the timing reports for all the FPGA designs, use the command:

	make timing

To clean all the project subdirectories, use one of the commands:

	make clean
	make distclean
	make maintainer-clean


=head2 Environment

These makefiles were developed and tested using the following versions of software:

	GNU make          : 3.79.1 (version 3.77.1 does not work)
	Active State perl : 5.8.4, 5.8.8
	Xilinx WebPACK    : 6.3.03i, 8.1.03i


=head2 Source Files

You can download an example of a Xilinx project directory that uses these makefiles and perl scripts
from http://www.xess.com/projects/XILINX_MAKEFILES.tar.gz .


=head2 Author

Dave Vanden Bout, X Engineering Software Systems Corp.

Send bug reports to bugs@xess.com.


=head2 Copyright and License

© 2005-2006 by X Engineering Software Systems Corporation.

These applications can be freely distributed and modified
as long as you do not remove the attributions to the author or his employer.


=head2 History

=over

=item

03/26/2007 - Modified xilinx_rules.mk to support ISE9 project directory structure.

=item

05/16/2006 - Added 'nice' feature to prettify VHDL source files.

=item

05/16/2006 - Fixed get_project_files.pl to handle quotes in Xilinx ISE 8.1i .prj file.

=item

05/05/2005 - Initial release.
 
=back


=cut
